Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
it’s part three of our mini-series
on “Young American Outlaws”.
In part one, we learned about the
story of Ross Ulbricht, the founder
of the drug marketplace Silk Road.
In part two, we heard about the brilliant
but tragically short life of Aaron
Swartz, the young man who believed so
much in internet freedom that he found
himself up against the US government.
And in today’s episode, part three,
we are going to be talking about Luigi
Mangione, the man who gunned down
the CEO of one of America’s largest
healthcare companies in broad daylight.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
The two previous characters in this
mini-series, Ross Ulbricht and Aaron
Swartz, might have committed acts the US
government considered “felonies”–serious
crimes–but they never picked up a
weapon and harmed anyone directly.
In Ross Ulbricht’s case, his critics
might say that his drug and contraband
marketplace indirectly harmed and killed
thousands, tens of thousands even.
And in Aaron Swartz’s case, even his
greatest critics would surely agree that
the most significant “harm” caused was the
potential loss of some corporate revenue
and damage to the concept of copyright.
And Aaron Swartz, were he still alive
today, would justifiably question why he
was mentioned even in the same sentence
as the subject of today’s episode.
Luigi Mangione, as you will
probably remember, murdered
a man in broad daylight.
Or to be completely correct,
as of the time of recording,
stands accused of murder, as the
case has not yet gone to trial.
So here’s what happened,
as far as we know so far.
On the morning of December 4th, 2024,
the CEO of the American health insurance
company, UnitedHealthcare, was in New
York City for an investor conference.
It was nothing out of the
ordinary for Brian Thompson.
The 50-year-old boss of America’s
largest health insurance company
travelled a lot, and Wall Street
was a regular haunt for him.
After all, this was a company valued
at almost $500 billion, one that
provides medical insurance for 50
million people, or 1 in 6 Americans.
At 6.40 am that morning, Thompson left
the Marriott hotel he was staying at and
made the short walk to the hotel where
the conference would be taking place.
Presumably, Thompson thought it
would be a day like any other.
Perhaps a few tough questions from
investors, reassurances that the company
was going in the right direction,
reminders of how the share price and
the company’s profits had increased
by 50% since Thompson had taken over
three years earlier, and how his $10
million a year compensation package was
therefore a small price to pay, and how
UnitedHealthcare was delivering excellent
service and value for the American people.
The day didn’t pan out like that.
Four minutes after leaving his
hotel, at 06.44 he was shot multiple
times, in the back and the leg.
Minutes later, the emergency services
arrived on the scene to find this
corporate titan in a pool of blood.
He was whisked to hospital, but pronounced
dead less than half an hour later.
To state the obvious, this was huge news.
He might not have been a household
name, in the category of Elon Musk
or Bill Gates, but this was the boss
of one of the biggest companies, not
just in America, but the whole world.
There seemed to be no personal motive;
Thompson had worked in corporate
America his entire life, he hadn’t
got tangled up in organised crime or
got involved in any kind of serious
personal dispute, he was praised by
colleagues as a “good, honest man”.
The evidence at the crime scene,
however, suggested a motive.
The words "deny," "defend" and "depose"
were found scrawled on three of the
used bullet casings, one word on each.
This seemed eerily similar to a phrase
often associated with the health
insurance industry to avoid paying
claims, “delay, deny, and defend”.
“Delay” refers to how companies
drag out the claim process, “deny”
means rejecting claims outright, and
“defend” means engaging in extended
legal battles with the claimant.
Suddenly, it seemed like the assassin’s
target wasn’t Brian Thompson the
man, but rather Brian Thompson the
CEO, Brian Thompson as a symbol
of the health insurance industry.
Fortunately for the police,
the entire thing, this daylight
murder, had been caught on CCTV.
A huge manhunt ensued, with the New
York City police department offering
a reward of $10,000 for information
about the shooter, a reward that
was then upped to $50,000 when the
FBI joined in the investigation.
As you may well remember, as it all
happened less than a year ago, photos
started to emerge of the suspected killer.
He was tall, white, and young,
with a pearly white smile.
He seemed to be pretty aware of the
presence of CCTV cameras, and always
covered his face and had his hood up, but
he let down his guard a couple of times,
once lowering his mask to flirt with a
receptionist at a New York City hostel.
A couple of days later, a
backpack was recovered in Central
Park, containing Monopoly money
and a Tommy Hilfiger jacket.
But still, no sign of the suspect.
A few days later, on December 9th, five
days after Brian Thompson was pronounced
dead, Pennsylvania police received
a call from a McDonald’s employee.
There was someone sitting in the
restaurant who bore a striking
resemblance to the pictures of
the suspect in the shooting.
The police arrived on the
scene and detained the man.
He was searched, and on his person
were found a 3D-printed gun and
suppressor, similar to those suspected
of having been used in the shooting.
They also found a fake driver’s
licence and a lengthy letter
criticising the US healthcare system.
It seemed police had found their man.
He was named as Luigi Mangione, and was
a 26-year-old University of Pennsylvania
graduate with no prior criminal record.
In the letter, which was described
by many news outlets as a manifesto,
Mangione laid clear his motivations.
It was 262 words in total, so I won’t
read all of it, but it was enough
to ignite a political firestorm.
In it, he wrote: “Frankly, these parasites
simply had it coming.” He railed against
America’s healthcare system, highlighting
the absurdity of a country spending
more on healthcare than anywhere else
while ranking 42nd in life expectancy.
In the letter–or manifesto–Mangione
indirectly confessed to the killing,
but showed no remorse, instead painting
himself as a warrior for social justice.
The Manhattan District Attorney
didn’t see it that way, and Mangione
was indicted with 11 different
charges relating to the murder.
This was on December 17th, 2024, and he
has remained in police custody ever since.
Now, on one level, this is a
straightforward, clear-cut case.
A man was murdered in
cold blood by another.
The accused has not denied it.
Murder is a very serious crime, and
Luigi Mangione will go to trial,
most probably be found guilty, and be
sentenced in accordance with the law.
It’s a murder case, one of almost
20,000 every year in the United States,
and this seems relatively simple.
But there are many aspects of
this case that are unusual.
Mangione was not a hardened criminal.
He had no prior criminal convictions,
was not known to the police, and
his profile was far from typical
for someone facing murder charges.
He had gone to an expensive,
private secondary school and
graduated at the top of his class.
He had studied computer engineering
at the Ivy League University of
Pennsylvania, one of the top universities
in the country, and had had a few
highly-paid jobs working in technology.
He was young, tall, and handsome.
He had suffered from some chronic back
problems, so there was a personal reason
for him to feel animosity towards the
healthcare system, but it was nothing
particularly out of the ordinary.
And as more details emerged about
Mangione, his manifesto, and the
crime, instead of criticism, there
were widespread social media posts in
support, portraying him as a sort of
21st-century folk hero, a figure willing
to stand up against an unjust system.
The hashtag #FreeLuigi started to trend;
you could buy t-shirts and mugs with his
face on, in a sort of Che Guevara style.
The McDonald’s employee who called
the police after recognising him
received death threats, and the
branch of McDonald’s where he
was apprehended by police was
inundated with negative reviews.
So why did this case capture such a
strange kind of public imagination?
Well, part of the answer
lies in the target.
Brian Thompson might not have
known Luigi Mangione, but he
wasn’t some random passer-by.
He wasn’t an unlucky
victim of circumstance.
He was the very visible head of
the most powerful health insurance
company in America, the face of
an industry that is one of the
most controversial in the country.
As I’m sure you know, healthcare
in the United States has long
been a political battleground.
Medical bills are the leading
cause of personal bankruptcy.
Stories of patients being denied
life-saving treatment because of insurance
loopholes are depressingly common.
And around 30 million Americans
have no health insurance at all.
So when Luigi Mangione’s letter was
published, when people saw the words
he had scrawled on those bullet casings
and read his note, his manifesto,
for some the narrative shifted.
It wasn’t simply a story about
a young man accused of murder.
It was presented as an act of
rebellion against a system that
millions believe to be broken.
For some, Brian Thompson wasn’t an unlucky
casualty; he was far from innocent.
He was the boss of a company that
made billions of dollars in profits
by denying payouts to its customers,
causing them anything from distress
to bankruptcy to not being able
to pay for life-saving treatment.
He was the figurehead of an organisation
that, to its biggest critics,
directly resulted in the early deaths
of thousands of people every year.
Mangione needed to take drastic action
for the country to wake up, and if a
man needed to die for the insurance
industry to be fixed, so be it.
To Luigi Mangione’s most ardent
supporters, Brian Thompson, and
anyone presiding over this broken
healthcare system, had it coming.
Others, of course, saw
it very differently.
Whatever grievances Mangione may
have had with the American healthcare
system, he had still taken a
gun and ended a stranger’s life.
To his critics, he was no hero, just
a murderer who tried to disguise
his crime with political slogans.
And interestingly enough,
support for Mangione wasn’t as
clear cut as right versus left.
For starters, Mangione’s
own politics were unclear.
He was painted as an extreme leftist
by the right-leaning press, but he
expressed both praise and criticism for
politicians on the left and right; he had
no clear political ideology, other than
a visceral hatred of corporate greed.
And in terms of where support
came from after his arrest,
it wasn’t black and white.
Those on the political left, especially
on the extreme left, were more likely to
side with him, but he also had support
from some figures on the right, who railed
against corporate greed and cronyism.
And this support wasn’t a niche thing.
According to one survey done shortly
after his arrest, 47% of people
identifying as “very liberal” reported
having a favourable or extremely
favourable opinion of Mangione.
And it was a similar
story when it came to age.
Younger Americans were more likely
to view him positively, with 39% of
18-29-year-olds saying they viewed him
either positively or very positively.
32% of this age group said they
didn’t know, and only 29% said
they viewed him unfavourably.
To repeat that, more young Americans
viewed him favourably than unfavourably,
and this was a man whose only public act,
the only reason his name was known, was
that he murdered a man in broad daylight.
Naturally, as the public support,
especially among younger Americans,
was clear, the comments sections of
newspapers were filled with opinion
pieces about what went wrong.
How did things get so bad?
Is there such public distaste with
corporate greed, especially among
young people, that people believe
such a drastic action is justified?
Is the healthcare system so truly
broken that murdering one of its
executives is lauded as a public service?
While all of this discussion was going
on, there was also the question of what
punishment should await Luigi Mangione?
In the United States, as you may
know, there are both state and
federal crimes, so he could be charged
under New York and federal law.
The importance of this comes down to
the question of the death penalty.
For the most serious crimes — murder,
terrorism, treason — the state can
and does pursue the death penalty.
New York State, where the crime was
committed, no longer uses capital
punishment, but this case was so
high-profile, and the murder so symbolic,
that prosecutors began exploring
the possibility of federal charges.
And at the federal level, the death
penalty is still very much on the books.
This is where politics elbowed
its way into the judicial system.
Donald Trump, during his first term,
was a vocal supporter of capital
punishment, even authorising a
record number of federal executions
in his final months in office.
He argued that it was a deterrent,
and in the case of heinous crimes like
terrorism or murder of public officials,
it was not only justified but necessary.
And shortly after being sworn in for
his second term, he signed an executive
order pushing for capital punishment
to be used whenever appropriate.
The order was somewhat vague,
but specified crimes in which
a law-enforcement officer
was killed or capital crimes
committed by an illegal immigrant.
To some, especially conservative
commentators, the cold-blooded
killing of a CEO was exactly the
sort of thing Trump was referring to.
They seized on the manifesto, the scrawled
messages, and the symbolism of the act.
They argued that this wasn’t just a
killing; it was domestic terrorism.
That Mangione hadn’t just murdered
Brian Thompson the man, but
had attempted to intimidate and
destabilise an entire industry,
perhaps even the American state itself.
What’s more, he showed no remorse,
no guilt for what he had done.
In their eyes, if the death penalty
wasn’t used here, when should it be?
But from the other side, the
case looked very different.
Opponents of capital punishment
pointed out that the United States is
one of the last Western democracies
to still execute its citizens.
They argued that the death penalty
doesn’t deter crime, that it’s applied
inconsistently, and what’s more,
that executing Mangione would risk
turning him into exactly the kind
of martyr he seemed to want to be.
If his face was already on
Che Guevara-style t-shirts,
flags and mugs, executing him
would send this into overdrive.
So the debate spiralled.
Should the state be making an example out
of Mangione, in the harshest possible way?
Or would doing so only validate his claim
that the system is unjust and brutal?
And hanging over all of this was a
deeper, uncomfortable question: what
pushed him to do this in the first place?
Mangione wasn’t a hardened criminal.
He wasn’t a man with a long
record of violence, or a
member of an organised gang.
He was a university graduate, a young
man who, on paper, had every advantage.
A bright student, top of his class,
with degrees and good jobs behind him.
By most measures, the sort of person
you might expect to be working within
the system, not lashing out against it.
That, in some ways, is part of
what made this case so unsettling.
If someone like Mangione could be
radicalised to the point of taking
a gun and carrying out a public
assassination, and if there was so
much public support for him after he
did it, then what does that say about
the level of anger simmering beneath
the surface in American society?
And this is where his story connects
back to the others in this mini-series.
Ross Ulbricht, Aaron Swartz, and now
Luigi Mangione, three very different
young men, all accused of crimes, but
each one surrounded by a heated political
debate that turned them from defendants
in a courtroom into larger-than-life
symbols of something much bigger.
Ulbricht, for his supporters, wasn’t just
a man who ran an online drug market; he
was a digital pioneer pushing back against
government control of the internet.
Swartz wasn’t just someone accused of
illegally downloading academic journals;
he was a visionary, a martyr for the
principle that knowledge should be free.
And Mangione, at least to some,
isn’t just a man accused of murder;
he’s a warrior against a system
that many see as unjust to its core.
In the case of Mangione, he is the
only one whose case is still pending.
Ulbricht is free; Swartz is dead.
His next trial date is set
for September 16th, the week
this episode will be released.
Trump’s appointed Attorney General, Pam
Bondi, has publicly instructed federal
prosecutors to seek the death penalty.
No doubt the outside of the courthouse
will be packed with supporters
holding #FreeLuigi signs, while
the officials inside decide on
where the process will go next.
The evidence that he pulled the trigger,
and that this was a premeditated
murder, seems insurmountable.
There seems to be little doubt
that Mangione will be found guilty;
the only question is how history
will remember him: as a murderer,
a martyr, or something in between.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Luigi Mangione, and with
it comes the end of this three-part
mini-series on Young American Outlaws.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode,
and of this mini-series in general.
Ross Ulbricht, Aaron
Swartz and Luigi Mangione.
What do you think about their stories,
and their crimes, or alleged crimes?
Is it fair to lump them
all in a similar category?
Are there similar stories in your country?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.